VERSIONING.md, before:

# Versioning and Branching in controller-runtime

*NB*: this also applies to controller-tools.

## TL;DR:

### Users

* We follow [Semantic Versioning (semver)](https://semver.org)
* Use releases with your dependency management to ensure that you get compatible
  code
* The master branch contains all the latest code, some of which may break
  compatibility (so "normal" `go get` is not recommended)

### Contributors

* All code PR must be labeled with :bug: (patch fixes), :sparkles:
  (backwards-compatible features), or :warning: (breaking changes)
* Breaking changes will find their way into the next major release, other
  changes will go into an semi-immediate patch or minor release
* Please *try* to avoid breaking changes when you can.  They make users face
  difficult decisions ("when do I go through the pain of upgrading?"), and make
  life hard for maintainers and contributors (dealing with differences on stable
  branches).

### Mantainers

Don't be lazy, read the rest of this doc :-)

## Overview

controller-runtime (and friends) follow [Semantic
Versioning](https://semver.org).  I'd recommend reading the aforementioned link
if you're not familiar, but essentially, for any given release X.Y.Z:

* An X (*major*) release indicates a set of backwards-compatible code. Changing
  X means there's a breaking change.
* A Y (*minor*) release indicates a minimum feature set.  Changing Y means the
  addition of a backwards-compatible feature.
* A Z (*patch*) release indicates minimum set of bugfixes.  Changing Z means a
  backwards-compatible change that doesn't add functionality.

*NB*: If the major release is `0`, any minor release may contain breaking
changes.

These guarantees extend to all code exposed in public APIs of
controller-runtime. This includes code both in controller-runtime itself, *plus
types from dependencies in public APIs*.  Types and functions not in public APIs
are not considered part of the guarantee.

In order to easily maintain the guarantees, we have a couple of processes that
we follow.

## Branches

controller-runtime contains two types of branches: the *master* branch and
*release-X* branches.

The *master* branch is where development happens.  All the latest and greatest
code, including breaking changes, happens on master.

The *release-X* branches contain stable, backwards compatible code.  Every major
(X) release, a new such branch is created.  It is from these branches that minor
and patch releases are tagged.  If some cases, it may be necessary open PRs for
bugfixes directly against stable branches, but this should generally not be the
case.

The maintainers are responsible for updating the contents of this branch;
generally, this is done just before a release using release tooling that filters
and checks for changes tagged as breaking (see below).

### Tooling

* [release-notes.sh](hack/release/release-notes.sh): generate release notes for
  a range of commits, and check for next version type (***TODO***)

* [verify-emoji.sh](hack/release/verify-emoji.sh): check that your PR and/or
  commit messages have the right versioning icon (***TODO***).

## PR Process

Every PR should be annotated with an icon indicating whether it's a:

* Breaking change: :warning: (`:warning:`)
* Non-breaking feature: :sparkles: (`:sparkles:`)
* Patch fix: :bug: (`:bug:`)
* Docs: :book: (`:book:`)
* Infra/Tests/Other: :running: (`:running:`)
* No release note: :ghost: (`:ghost:`)

Use :ghost: (no release note) only for the PRs that change or revert unreleased
changes, which don't deserve a release note. Please don't abuse it.

You can also use the equivalent emoji directly, since GitHub doesn't render the
`:xyz:` aliases in PR titles.

Individual commits should not be tagged separately, but will generally be
assumed to match the PR. For instance, if you have a bugfix in with a breaking
change, it's generally encouraged to submit the bugfix separately, but if you
must put them in one PR, mark the commit separately.

### Commands and Workflow

controller-runtime follows the standard Kubernetes workflow: any PR needs `lgtm`
and `approved` labels, PRs authors must have signed the CNCF CLA, and PRs must
pass the tests before being merged.  See [the contributor
docs](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/pull-requests.md#the-testing-and-merge-workflow)
for more info.

We use the same priority and kind labels as Kubernetes.  See the labels tab in
GitHub for the full list.

The standard Kubernetes comment commands should work in controller-runtime.  See
[Prow](https://prow.k8s.io/command-help) for a command reference.

## Release Process

Minor and patch releases are generally done immediately after a feature or
bugfix is landed, or sometimes a series of features tied together.

Minor releases will only be tagged on the *most recent* major release branch,
except in exceptional circumstances.  Patches will be backported to maintained
stable versions, as needed.

Major releases are done shortly after a breaking change is merged -- once a
breaking change is merged, the next release *must* be a major revision. We don't
intend to have a lot of these, so we may put off merging breaking PRs until a
later date.

### Exact Steps

Follow the release-specific steps below, then follow the general steps after
that.

#### Minor and patch releases

1. Update the release-X branch with the latest set of changes by calling `git
   rebase master` from the release branch.

#### Major releases

1. Create a new release branch named `release-X` (where `X` is the new version)
   off of master.

#### General

2. Generate release notes using the release note tooling.

3. Add a release for controller-runtime on GitHub, using those release notes,
   with a title of `vX.Y.Z`.

4. Do a similar process for
   [controller-tools](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/controller-tools)

5. Announce the release in `#kubebuilder` on Slack with a pinned message.

6. Potentially update
   [kubebuilder](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder) as well.

### Breaking Changes

Try to avoid breaking changes.  They make life difficult for users, who have to
rewrite their code when they eventually upgrade, and for
maintainers/contributors, who have to deal with differences between master and
stable branches.

That being said, we'll occasionally want to make breaking changes. They'll be
merged onto master, and will then trigger a major release (see [Release
Process](#release-process)).  Because breaking changes induce a major revision,
the maintainers may delay a particular breaking change until a later date when
they are ready to make a major revision with a few breaking changes.

If you're going to make a breaking change, please make sure to explain in detail
why it's helpful.  Is it necessary to cleanly resolve an issue? Does it improve
API ergonomics?

Maintainers should treat breaking changes with caution, and evaluate potential
non-breaking solutions (see below).

Note that API breakage in public APIs due to dependencies will trigger a major
revision, so you may occasionally need to have a major release anyway, due to
changes in libraries like `k8s.io/client-go` or `k8s.io/apimachinery`.

*NB*: Pre-1.0 releases treat breaking changes a bit more lightly.  We'll still
consider carefully, but the pre-1.0 timeframe is useful for converging on a
ergonomic API.

#### Avoiding breaking changes

##### Solutions to avoid

* **Confusingly duplicate methods, functions, or variables.**

  For instance, suppose we have an interface method `List(ctx context.Context,
  options *ListOptions, obj runtime.Object) error`, and we decide to switch it
  so that options come at the end, parametrically. Adding a new interface method
  `ListParametric(ctx context.Context, obj runtime.Object, options...
  ListOption)` is probably not the right solution:

   * Users will intuitively see `List`, and use that in new projects, even if
     it's marked as deprecated.

   * Users who don't notice the deprecation may be confused as to the difference
     between `List` and `ListParametric`.

   * It's not immediately obvious in isolation (e.g. in surrounding code) why
     the method is called `ListParametric`, and may cause confusion when reading
     code that makes use of that method.

  In this case, it may be better to make the breaking change, and then
  eventually do a major release.

## Why don't we...

### Use "next"-style branches

Development branches:

* Don't win us much in terms of maintenance in the case of breaking changes (we
  still have to merge/manage multiple branches for development and stable) 

* Can be confusing to contributors, who often expect master to have the latest
  changes.

### Never break compatibility

Never doing a new major release could be an admirable goal, but gradually leads
to API cruft.

Since one of the goals of controller-runtime is to be a friendly and intuitive
API, we want to avoid too much API cruft over time, and occaisonal breaking
changes in major releases help accomplish that goal.

Furthermore, our dependency on Kubernetes libraries makes this difficult (see
below)

### Always assume we've broken compatibility

*a.k.a. k8s.io/client-go style*

While this makes life easier (a bit) for maintainers, it's problematic for
users.  While breaking changes arrive sooner, upgrading becomes very painful.

Furthermore, we still have to maintain stable branches for bugfixes, so the
maintenance burden isn't lessened by a ton.

### Extend compatibility guarantees to all dependencies

This is very difficult with the number of Kubernetes dependencies we have.
Kubernetes dependencies tend to either break compatibility every major release
(e.g. k8s.io/client-go, which loosely follows semver), or at a whim (many other
Kubernetes libraries).

If we limit to the few objects we expose, we can better inform users about how
*controller-runtime itself* has changed in a given release.  Then, users can
make informed decisions about how to proceed with any direct uses of Kubernetes
dependencies their controller-runtime-based application may have.

Commit message:

WIP: Update versioning docs for Crossplane
Signed-off-by: Nic Cope <negz@rk0n.org>

VERSIONING.md, after:

# Versioning and branching in crossplane-runtime

This document details crossplane-runtime's version and branch strategy. It is
derived from controller-runtime's [stance on the same topic](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/controller-runtime/blob/aac8bc7/VERSIONING.md).
Most consumers of and contributors to crossplane-runtime need only read the
heading that pertains to them. introduction; maintainers should be familiar with
the entire document.

## Consumers

* We follow [Semantic Versioning (semver)](https://semver.org).
* Use releases with your dependency management to ensure that you get compatible
  code.
* The master branch contains all the latest code, some of which may break
  compatibility (so "normal" `go get` is not recommended).

### Contributors

* All code PR must be labelled with `bug` (patch fixes), or `improvement`
  (new functionality and features).
* Changes that break API compatibility must be labelled `breaking`.
* While we're below 1.0.0 breaking changes will find their way into the next
  patch release. Other changes will be included in the next patch or minor
  release.
* Please *try* to avoid breaking changes when you can.  They make users face
  difficult decisions ("when do I go through the pain of upgrading?"), and make
  life hard for maintainers and contributors (dealing with differences on stable
  branches).

## Overview

controller-runtime (and friends) follow [Semantic
Versioning](https://semver.org).  I'd recommend reading the aforementioned link
if you're not familiar, but essentially, for any given release X.Y.Z:

* An X (*major*) release indicates a set of backwards-compatible code. Changing
  X means there's a breaking change.
* A Y (*minor*) release indicates a minimum feature set.  Changing Y means the
  addition of a backwards-compatible feature.
* A Z (*patch*) release indicates minimum set of bugfixes.  Changing Z means a
  backwards-compatible change that doesn't add functionality.

*NB*: If the major release is `0`, any minor release may contain breaking
changes.

These guarantees extend to all code exposed in public APIs of
controller-runtime. This includes code both in controller-runtime itself, *plus
types from dependencies in public APIs*.  Types and functions not in public APIs
are not considered part of the guarantee.

In order to easily maintain the guarantees, we have a couple of processes that
we follow.

## Branches

controller-runtime contains two types of branches: the *master* branch and
*release-X* branches.

The *master* branch is where development happens.  All the latest and greatest
code, including breaking changes, happens on master.

The *release-X* branches contain stable, backwards compatible code.  Every major
(X) release, a new such branch is created.  It is from these branches that minor
and patch releases are tagged.  If some cases, it may be necessary open PRs for
bugfixes directly against stable branches, but this should generally not be the
case.

The maintainers are responsible for updating the contents of this branch;
generally, this is done just before a release using release tooling that filters
and checks for changes tagged as breaking (see below).

## PR Process

Every PR should be annotated with an icon indicating whether it's a:

* Breaking change: :warning: (`:warning:`)
* Non-breaking feature: :sparkles: (`:sparkles:`)
* Patch fix: :bug: (`:bug:`)
* Docs: :book: (`:book:`)
* Infra/Tests/Other: :running: (`:running:`)
* No release note: :ghost: (`:ghost:`)

Use :ghost: (no release note) only for the PRs that change or revert unreleased
changes, which don't deserve a release note. Please don't abuse it.

You can also use the equivalent emoji directly, since GitHub doesn't render the
`:xyz:` aliases in PR titles.

Individual commits should not be tagged separately, but will generally be
assumed to match the PR. For instance, if you have a bugfix in with a breaking
change, it's generally encouraged to submit the bugfix separately, but if you
must put them in one PR, mark the commit separately.

### Commands and Workflow

controller-runtime follows the standard Kubernetes workflow: any PR needs `lgtm`
and `approved` labels, PRs authors must have signed the CNCF CLA, and PRs must
pass the tests before being merged.  See [the contributor
docs](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/pull-requests.md#the-testing-and-merge-workflow)
for more info.

We use the same priority and kind labels as Kubernetes.  See the labels tab in
GitHub for the full list.

The standard Kubernetes comment commands should work in controller-runtime.  See
[Prow](https://prow.k8s.io/command-help) for a command reference.

## Release Process

Minor and patch releases are generally done immediately after a feature or
bugfix is landed, or sometimes a series of features tied together.

Minor releases will only be tagged on the *most recent* major release branch,
except in exceptional circumstances.  Patches will be backported to maintained
stable versions, as needed.

Major releases are done shortly after a breaking change is merged -- once a
breaking change is merged, the next release *must* be a major revision. We don't
intend to have a lot of these, so we may put off merging breaking PRs until a
later date.

### Exact Steps

Follow the release-specific steps below, then follow the general steps after
that.

#### Minor and patch releases

1. Update the release-X branch with the latest set of changes by calling `git
   rebase master` from the release branch.

#### Major releases

1. Create a new release branch named `release-X` (where `X` is the new version)
   off of master.

#### General

2. Generate release notes using the release note tooling.

3. Add a release for controller-runtime on GitHub, using those release notes,
   with a title of `vX.Y.Z`.

4. Do a similar process for
   [controller-tools](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/controller-tools)

5. Announce the release in `#kubebuilder` on Slack with a pinned message.

6. Potentially update
   [kubebuilder](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder) as well.

### Breaking Changes

Try to avoid breaking changes.  They make life difficult for users, who have to
rewrite their code when they eventually upgrade, and for
maintainers/contributors, who have to deal with differences between master and
stable branches.

That being said, we'll occasionally want to make breaking changes. They'll be
merged onto master, and will then trigger a major release (see [Release
Process](#release-process)).  Because breaking changes induce a major revision,
the maintainers may delay a particular breaking change until a later date when
they are ready to make a major revision with a few breaking changes.

If you're going to make a breaking change, please make sure to explain in detail
why it's helpful.  Is it necessary to cleanly resolve an issue? Does it improve
API ergonomics?

Maintainers should treat breaking changes with caution, and evaluate potential
non-breaking solutions (see below).

Note that API breakage in public APIs due to dependencies will trigger a major
revision, so you may occasionally need to have a major release anyway, due to
changes in libraries like `k8s.io/client-go` or `k8s.io/apimachinery`.

*NB*: Pre-1.0 releases treat breaking changes a bit more lightly.  We'll still
consider carefully, but the pre-1.0 timeframe is useful for converging on a
ergonomic API.

#### Avoiding breaking changes

##### Solutions to avoid

* **Confusingly duplicate methods, functions, or variables.**

  For instance, suppose we have an interface method `List(ctx context.Context,
  options *ListOptions, obj runtime.Object) error`, and we decide to switch it
  so that options come at the end, parametrically. Adding a new interface method
  `ListParametric(ctx context.Context, obj runtime.Object, options...
  ListOption)` is probably not the right solution:

   * Users will intuitively see `List`, and use that in new projects, even if
     it's marked as deprecated.

   * Users who don't notice the deprecation may be confused as to the difference
     between `List` and `ListParametric`.

   * It's not immediately obvious in isolation (e.g. in surrounding code) why
     the method is called `ListParametric`, and may cause confusion when reading
     code that makes use of that method.

  In this case, it may be better to make the breaking change, and then
  eventually do a major release.

## Why don't we...

### Use "next"-style branches

Development branches:

* Don't win us much in terms of maintenance in the case of breaking changes (we
  still have to merge/manage multiple branches for development and stable) 

* Can be confusing to contributors, who often expect master to have the latest
  changes.

### Never break compatibility

Never doing a new major release could be an admirable goal, but gradually leads
to API cruft.

Since one of the goals of controller-runtime is to be a friendly and intuitive
API, we want to avoid too much API cruft over time, and occaisonal breaking
changes in major releases help accomplish that goal.

Furthermore, our dependency on Kubernetes libraries makes this difficult (see
below)

### Always assume we've broken compatibility

*a.k.a. k8s.io/client-go style*

While this makes life easier (a bit) for maintainers, it's problematic for
users.  While breaking changes arrive sooner, upgrading becomes very painful.

Furthermore, we still have to maintain stable branches for bugfixes, so the
maintenance burden isn't lessened by a ton.

### Extend compatibility guarantees to all dependencies

This is very difficult with the number of Kubernetes dependencies we have.
Kubernetes dependencies tend to either break compatibility every major release
(e.g. k8s.io/client-go, which loosely follows semver), or at a whim (many other
Kubernetes libraries).

If we limit to the few objects we expose, we can better inform users about how
*controller-runtime itself* has changed in a given release.  Then, users can
make informed decisions about how to proceed with any direct uses of Kubernetes
dependencies their controller-runtime-based application may have.
